Project Gutenberg's The Planet That Time Forgot, by Donald A. Wollheim

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The Planet That Time Forgot

Author: Donald A. Wollheim

Release Date: April 10, 2020 [EBook #61797]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PLANET THAT TIME FORGOT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                      THE PLANET THAT TIME FORGOT

                         By DONALD A. WOLLHEIM

            Out beyond furthest Pluto, beyond pale Neptune,
                roared the _Stardust_. Rocketing toward
           the monstrous new planet that filled the heavens.
              Planet "P"--the colossus that Time forgot!

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                       Planet Stories Fall 1940.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


She stood upon the high battlements of the palace, overlooking the land
of Toom, with sunlight splashing over the beauty and radiance of her.
She, Oomith, _mataiya_ of Toom. Her eyes wandered to the road that
wound, ribbon-like, far beyond her land, out into the great reaches
of her world, out into Nimbor. Nimbor, whose lords even now were in
session with Toom's officials, demanding the land's surrender to their
superior forces. Nimbor, whose rulers offered life to the heads of
Toom's commonwealth providing the _mataiya_ mate with their prince.

She stood, trying to drink in the splendor of the land, for this might
be a last time. What her answer would be as Directress of Internal
Relations she well knew; what her answer, as woman, to Aald of Nimbor
would be she knew even better. But now she must return to the council
meeting.

Danuth, Head Center of Toom, was speaking as she re-entered. "What
you demand, Aald of Nimbor, is the commonwealth's freedom, and our
officers, in return for petty sinecures under your proposed regime. And
the _mataiya_ in marriage, as if it were in the power of any save she
to grant that."

She did not flush as the insolent eyes of the young man across the
table fell upon her, appraised, then leered approval at her. Her voice
was clear and cold as she said:

"You boast loudly of your war-machine, Aald of Nimbor. You remark
casually that you could crush our armies with a mere handful of men.
But you say you are willing to spare our lives if we surrender without
a struggle.

"In return for what do you offer us life, prince of Nimbor? Serfdom and
misery for our people under Nimbor's hand; the stigma of cowardice upon
us. I shall not argue with you. My answer is final: no!"

       *       *       *       *       *

She glanced at Danuth, met the grim smile in his eyes. Was it possible
that the careful building of decades would soon be wiped away? That the
hopes and plans of Toom and her people lay helpless before the whims of
this arrogant child with the lusts and appetites of a man? In Toom, he
would still be a student, learning the responsibilities as well as the
rights of citizenship. A coldness ran through her as she pictured Toom
under his rule. Then Danuth's voice interrupted her thoughts.

"Even if the _mataiya_ had not taken the initiative, my answer would
still be the same. No, Aald of Nimbor, no. If you mean to enslave us,
you will have to work for your victory. And, superior war-machine or
not, the people of Toom will make your triumph a hardly-bought one, if
indeed you can triumph against a free people."

It was hard to keep a calm face as the prince tried first to scowl,
then to sneer. If only this were the comic melodrama it should have
been! But, no--if Nimbor's claims were based on fact, then there
would be no more laughter for Toom and her people. Aald's tones were
mockingly courteous.

"You speak well, Danuth, but your words prove your incapacity to
govern anyone. What were your redoubtable Lugarth and the invincible
hordes from Bhuur, of which you Toomians make so much? In whose name
you still deem yourself secure from conquest? They were no more than
barbarians--savages armed with spears and swords. Good fighters, I
grant you, but helpless before the new warfare of which I am master.

"Do you think I am lying? This is your last chance. When you see your
armies burn to cinders before your eyes, see your fields and towns
incinerated, then it will be too late to bargain. Then you will come to
me with pleas for peace, but I shall not hear you."

His eyes fell upon her again possessively. "Then I shall not honor you
with the title of princess, Oomith of Toom. Woe to the conquered.

"You forget the matter of scientific progress, Toomians. We left your
stupid notions of international relations behind long ago. If you
surrender now, I guarantee the land of Toom the same care as I bestow
upon Nimbor; otherwise, it shall be treated as a conquered province."

He stood up glaring. "I give you your last chance. Yield now!"

She rose lightly, as did the others, meeting his gaze with eyes steady
and unafraid. "Toom does not yield. Earn your victory if you can; we
are ready." A chorus of assents indicated that she spoke for all.

Aald bowed with an exaggerated gesture, swept a final lecherous glance
in her direction, then withdrew as Danuth rang a bell signaling
attendants. Once the other had gone, he sank back into the chair, his
eyes passing from one official to another. She gripped his hand.

"Do you think he can do as he claims?"

"I greatly fear so. The reports from our agents sound
incredible--almost like wizardry. A projector that casts an invisible
light, causing whomsoever it touches to die at once, as if boiling to
death. If they be true, then Toom is lost."

       *       *       *       *       *

Down below, in another part of the palace, the emissaries of Nimbor
prepared to depart. Aald was whispering to one. What he said was
scarcely understood, but the smiles on the faces of both could be taken
as indicative.

"We will be waiting at the Corian Gate," said Aald in departing. The
other bowed, and beckoned to two attendants of Nimbor.

An hour passed. At the Corian Gate to the palace grounds, facing the
wide smooth road that led to Nimbor, a thousand miles away, rested a
black, torpedo-shaped two-wheeled vehicle, now balanced by temporary
legs set out from it. Painted on the door to its single cabin was the
Imperial Shield of Nimbor.

Seated within, at the controls, was a man of Nimbor's party. Occasional
puffs of smoke emitted from the rocket tubes at the rear as the ship
was being kept ready for instant use. Aald himself waited impatiently
in the road, fretting under the watchful eyes of the commonwealth
guards at the gate. Finally he caught sight of something, and addressed
the guards.

"They are my companions. Open the gate, guards, and let them through."
He seemed to stare a moment at the oncomers, then called. "What's the
matter with Eldh? Why are you carrying him?"

One of the two men approaching answered: "He slipped on a staircase and
fell, Your Highness. He is unconscious and seems to have broken his
leg. We thought it best to give temporary treatment now then bring him
back with us; it is why we were late, Your Highness."

The prince nodded approval, motioned them to hasten. As they went
through the gates, one of the Toomian guards looked down at the face of
the black-covered body and checked it off his list. The men of Nimbor
entered the rocketmobile, shut the door. A terrific roar as the vehicle
got under way, then it had vanished down the long road.

Inside the conveyance Aald bent over the unconscious figure, looked
down at the scarred masculine features of one of the soldiers who had
accompanied him. Then, with a chuckle, he put his hand on the yellow
hair and pulled. The entire face seemed to fall apart. Beneath the
extremely convincing mask was the face of Oomith, lying unconscious.

"It worked beautifully," he commented. "What of Eldh? Did he make his
escape through the merchants' entrance as planned?"

"Yes, Highness. They suspected nothing. Nor did we have any trouble in
kidnaping the _mataiya_. There were no guards by her room, and she had
succumbed before she suspected the presence of a gas-tube. They won't
know she is missing before we have arrived in the city."

Within the hour, the rocketmobile had passed the border and was in the
capital of Nimbor.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was noon on the day set for attack. Aald and the commanders of the
staff awaited the emperor's coming within a small enclosure just inside
the walls of Nimbor. Outside, in the road beyond the open gate, a
rocket vehicle awaited in readiness to take them to the front. Oomith
was there as well.

"You see," drawled Aald, "we make good our boast. Very soon you will be
joined by Danuth and the other commonwealth officials as our prisoner.
You really should have married me when you had the chance; it would
have saved many lives."

Oomith stared at him frostily. "The people of Toom would never have
yielded to such filth as you, even had we betrayed them. It would have
made no difference. We of Toom have self respect and honor to a degree
that I fear is outside of your understanding."

His laugh was not pleasant. "Still prattling over your little
foolishness. Honor, respect--what are they to the destinies of nations
and dynasties? Such delusions are hardly worthy of the Oomith I might
have married."

He seized a scroll from one of the officers standing nearby, shook it
before her. "Here! Here is honor and respect. Here is such a thing as
makes greatness. These are the designs of our war machines; this is
what will teach the Toomians respect."

Without answering, Oomith snatched the paper cylinder out of Aald's
hand and darted forward. Straight toward the open gate she fled, toward
the rocketmobile outside. A wild, insane scheme of seizing this and
escaping to her own land in time possessed her.

Caught off guard, the men were already at a disadvantage; they knew
even as they raced she could not be caught before reaching the gate.
With energy born of desperation, she hurled herself forward. But, just
as she was upon it, two soldiers stepped through and dashed at her.

At this point occurred what has gone down in history as the miracle
that saved Toom. It is something for which no parallel in all history
can be found. It caused Oomith to rise from the status of a beautiful
and capable _mataiya_ to that of a goddess.

Oomith stated later what were her feelings and experiences. She saw
the two oncoming soldiers quite clearly. Her only thought then was to
dash between them. Then, there came a terrible shock. An awful jolting
as if she had been struck by a thunderbolt. The scene before her eyes
dissolved instantaneously into a featureless gray; she felt herself
seemingly detached as one might feel in the throes of delirium. For
only a few seconds the strange sensation lasted. The only thing that
she remembered seeing was the momentary impression of a single vision
hanging before her eyes.

What she saw was a man. She does not recollect how he was clad. He
seemed to be sitting on a bench. Behind him she saw distinctly a blue
wall, in nature, metallic. In the wall was an open door through which
only grayness could be seen. The face of the man was held close to
hers; he seemed to be staring at her. It was the face of a middle-aged
man, of one powerful. Two clear brown eyes looked into hers; a mass
of wavy chestnut hair surmounted the godlike brow. And the figure was
smiling.

For only the minutest fraction of a second this lasted, then the
grayness returned. Yet, in a few seconds, it, too, had cleared away.
The terrible blankness and queer feeling vanished abruptly as it had
come. She could again see about her.

The castle of Aald and the men of Nimbor apparently had dissolved.
Above her rose the sides of the palace of the Directors of Toom. And
about her were the men of Toom. For a moment, Oomith and the men stared
at one another, each mutually startled and disbelieving what they saw.
Finally one of them recovered sufficiently to speak.

"_Mataiya_ Oomith! We thought you were being held captive in Nimbor;
what do you here? How did you get here?"

She could only reply hesitatingly: "I don't know. I was at Nimbor,
trying to escape. Then everything went dark, and I found myself
standing here." She started to put a hand to her forehead, then saw she
was holding something. The scroll! Her eyes flashed.

"Quick! Summon the council. I have here the plans for the death machine
of Nimbor. Bid them hurry. We have no time to lose!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Joris, military director of Toom, pounded the table with his fist.
"Damn! We know everything the enemy knows, now. We have the plans so
that we can meet them on their own terms. But they're on their way to
attack us now, and we haven't even a working model. It's all here--but
only on paper.

"We can save Toom, yes--but we cannot prevent the devastation of our
fields and towns, nor the slaughter of our helpless non-combatants. We
can only exact a vengeance and prevent a final triumph on the part of
the enemy!"

Before Danuth could speak, a man burst into the chamber, hair
disheveled, gasping for breath. On his face was an expression of
amazement and joy commingled. Twice he tried to speak and could emit
only gasps for breath. He clasped the shoulders of Joris, turned to
the others. At length speech returned to him, and he spoke slowly,
deliberately.

"The weapons of Nimbor are ours. They are here, within the walls of the
palace. I cannot tell you how they came, nor can any of the guards.
But we have all seen them, have examined their workings. We do not yet
understand their principles--"

At this point, another man burst in, equally distrait and out of
breath. "Directors!" he cried. "Toom is saved!" He fell to rapid, heavy
breathing while his eyes sought first one, then another of those
assembled. He waved his hand reassuringly as Danuth started to speak.

"No, Directors, I speak truly. I am one of the prison guards. We
suddenly heard noises from one of the unoccupied cells. Naturally, we
hurried over and looked in. Inside, we saw Aald and the Emperor of
Nimbor, with his entire staff. They don't know how they got there--I
presumed that you would not want us to release them immediately."

A roar of laughter from Joris greeted the speaker. He smote the
guard on the back with the palm of his huge hand, so that the fellow
staggered against the table.

"No, not _immediately_! We have other things to do first. But we're not
too busy to vote you the order of the commonwealth. And see if there
isn't a better position for you to fill than that of prison guard."

He turned to the others. "The enemy will be completely disorganized
and demoralized by this. I propose we move at once upon Nimbor, attack
strategic points and refrain as much as possible from such destruction
as will make miserable the lot of the Nimborian people, who are not
responsible for their degenerate rulers. I propose we make contacts
with the Nimborian commoners and urge them immediately to revolt
against what is left of the Aald-Rhankur regime, strike for their own
freedom."

       *       *       *       *       *

(_And now, we must go back in time, must travel to another part of
space. We must leave Planet P, where lie Nimbor and Toom, for a return
to Earth-time. Only thus can we have a logical understanding of the
events related above._)


                                  II

At an angle above the plane of the ecliptic over the orbits of the
asteroids was a long metal craft, resembling somewhat a cross between
a towerless submarine and an all-metal zeppelin. In the forward cabin,
six men were gathered. They comprised the entire crew and command of
the vessel. Although an official meeting, there was about it none of
the stiffness that marks such an event in military circles on Earth:
on an interplanetary vessel every man's life is in the hands of every
other man. The captain is obeyed, not because of his rank, primarily,
but because the lives of all depend upon explicit conformation to
discipline. But in this vital discipline, there is no place for the
sham of stiff-necked formality; thus, captain, officer, or member of
the crew spoke to each other with frankness and mutual respect.

Captain Wanderman looked around, mentally checking to see if all
were present: Lieutenant Alfred Rokesmith; Weber, the scientist;
Opp, explorer and cook extraordinary; Mullins, skilled mechanical
specialist; Barth, doctor and general overseer of vital supplies.

Wanderman smiled. "I guess you're all eager to find out whither we're
heading, eh?"

"We sure would," spoke up Opp.

"Especially after that terrifically long period of acceleration," added
Weber. "Three days of it ... beats all my experience."

"It was necessary to achieve our speed. We're going a long way ... have
to make the trip as short as possible. We'll be putting on still more
acceleration once the asteroids are behind us."

"Neptune?" asked Barth. "Pluto?"

"Farther than either."

"You don't mean Planet P, do you?" spoke up Mullins. "The one that was
discovered last year, that hasn't been given a name yet?"

"Right!"

"I never did get quite clear on the subject of Planet P," drawled
Rokesmith. "Just how was it discovered?"

Captain Wanderman cleared his throat. "Few people are; even the experts
don't know much about it.

"Its existence was first surmised and calculated in 1931--about a
hundred years ago--by Professor William H. Pickering of Jamaica. He
observed that the planet Uranus was being displaced from its proper
orbit. Of course, this perturbation could be due only to the influence
of another planet, he thought. But there was no other body known
at that time which could account for the drag. Thus, the Professor
computed mathematically the existance, approximate size, and position
of an unknown body which would account for the odd behavior of Uranus.
This he calculated to be a giant planet of a diameter of approximately
44,000 miles, in mass the third greatest in the solar system. He puts
its distance to range in an eliptical orbit of from 5,000 million
miles to 9,000 million miles from the sun. This, of course, made it
extra-Plutonian in position. Its year would be in length about 656
Earthly years. He gave it the temporary name of Planet P.

"Planet P's existence was further indicated by the orbits of some
sixteen comets, also affected by a drag which the theoretical planet
made perfectly accountable. Last year the planet Neptune had finally
arrived in the position where it, too, would be affected by this body.
You understand: the astronomers, calculating both known and theoretical
factors, determined that, if this Planet P existed, an irregularity
in Neptune's behavior would be discovered at this particular time.
The predicted irregularity arrived on time; thus, due to this added
information, our astronomers were able to find out precisely where the
new planet should be sought. And they found it. It is indeed an immense
thing, shows a perceptible disc even at its great distance from Earth.
We may anticipate something different when we arrive."

       *       *       *       *       *

Days went by. Endless days marked only by the chronometer in the
unchanging blackness of the celestial void. The tiny pinpoints of
myriad stars glowed unchangingly. Behind them, a few planets grew more
and more minute, each in turn finally being blotted out by the corona
of the sun. Jupiter's orbit was left behind; they saw the great ringed
planet loom up to one side and fade away as all the others had done.
But this was not with the flashing speed of objects and cities passing
the rocket-vehicle on Earth. It was a matter of days before each change
could be realized, weeks before a planet filled the entire spaceports.

Onward and outward. Celebrations when at last Uranus was passed,
the hitherto outpost of interplanetary exploration. Eventually pale
Neptune, mysterious planet, passed under them, directly in their path,
its great misty, frigid sphere glowing eerily in the twilight of outer
worlds.

Outward. Tiny Pluto was too far off to be seen, but its orbit was
passed. For a hundred years, the outpost of the solar system. Now
dethroned by the enormous newcomer, its passing was still a solemn
moment. Then, one day Barth observed a tiny light where no light should
be. Celebration again rang through the vessel: Planet P was sighted!

Days of deceleration followed. The rockets flamed, but no longer from
the stern of the vessel. Days of a continual blasting from the vessel's
prow until at last the unbelievable acceleration was neutralized. Now
the planet had grown, until, even with their greatly decreased speed,
it filled the view. Still more blasting until the ship was virtually
drifting along, caught only by the gravity of the monstrous new world.

A great disk glowing dimly in the light of the stars, especially in the
light of one particularly brilliant star that was the Earthmen's sun.
The vaguest hints of geological features could be seen. Planet P.

The rockets flared again in an intricate pattern. Balanced on the
pattern, the ship was lowered, slowly, into the atmosphere of the
strange world. About it flamed a red glow as proof of atmosphere. An
atmosphere, doubtless, of some unknown gases that would not congeal
in the awful cold. And, finally, a shrill whistling penetrating the
triple-thick walls, a dull thud, and a silence as she came to rest.

The voyage was over. Man had reached the outermost limits of the solar
system, had arrived safely at the mysterious outer world, Planet P.

       *       *       *       *       *

The men gathered in space suits. "Each man will take searchlights
and emergency rations. You will obey Lieutenant Rokesmith and myself
implicitly; only on pledges of such obedience from all of you can I
permit a planet-party to land."

Each member of the crew spoke his agreement.

"Mullins, take a coil of rope; Weber, the barometer and compass; Barth,
the camera and flash. Are you sure your gravity controls are adjusted
to decrease your weight to Earth normal? Make sure, everyone--that goes
for me, too."

"Check!"

Rokesmith turned the lever and swung the thick outer port open.
Wanderman stepped out onto the ground; the others followed.

Above them was a deep blue sky strewn with stars, though lacking in
the abundant distribution of the outer void. Beneath their feet lay a
clay-like expanse. They looked about them.

There was something dark looming up in the starlight a distance away.
The captain started off in that direction, beckoned the others to
follow. All felt that strange sensation that comes for everyone when
he stands on the terrain of an alien planet. It makes no difference
how often this experience has been undergone previously; the sensation
cannot be shaken off.

"It looks like a wall," sang out Opp as they reached the looming thing.

Rokesmith turned the beam of his flashlight on it. "It is a wall!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Unmistakably, it was a structure made of many square blocks of
stone fitted together to form a section rising into the air from a
foundation. Weber flashed his light around. "It ends here."

The men hesitated to go around. What could this enigmatic wall be doing
on this frigid world? The instruments showed the temperature to be many
hundred degrees below zero Fahrenheit. What beings could have built
this great wall? What could it mean?

But at last they did go around the edifice, flashing their lights
before them. And nearly collapsed from the shock of what they saw: a
broad paved street on which bordered many stone houses whose glass
windows reflected the dim glow of the stars above. The tiny sun cast a
faint illumination on it all.

"People!" gasped Mullins.

There were. Standing on the streets and in the doors of the houses were
the dim figures of men. Unmistakably human in form.

"They're not alive," observed Rokesmith.

"At least, they are not moving," replied Barth quickly.

"Come on, then. Why are we waiting? Are you afraid of a lot of
statues?" Captain Wanderman suited action to his words as he strode
forward, stopping directly before the first of the standing figures. He
cast his beam over it from head to foot.

Unmistakably, it was a man. Clad in clothes and undeniably human. Its
features were perfectly normal, bore the flush of life. The feet and
entire body were set in attitude as if in the act of taking a step. But
it was motionless.

"Some statue!" breathed Opp. "I would swear it was a real man."

"It is a real man," said Barth, softly. He bent close to the face. "It
has the pores and tiny hairs that can only be on a true body."

"Then he must have been alive once," murmured Weber. "What do you
suppose happened to him? Is he petrified or only frozen solid?"

"Frozen, I think," said Barth. "Yet, it is very strange. His flesh is
still soft and resilient; it is not natural."

"A land of frozen people!" Captain Wanderman's words struck a chilling
note in all of them. Quickly they investigated the other figures.
Some men, some women, some old, some young. All kinds and types;
all apparently had been frozen solid in the middle of their normal
activities. None showed any sign of being aware that death had struck.
When the terrible freezing occurred it must have happened so swiftly,
instantaneously, as to have caught all unaware.

They moved on, saying little. There was that same eerie atmosphere that
one finds in a wax museum while passing about among the realistic but
silent and motionless figures of apparently ordinary people. Add to
that the grim knowledge that the figures they now saw had been alive,
that in effect the explorers were in a monstrous, planet-wide graveyard.

They went on, coming to wide roads down which lines of marching men
stood silently in attitudes startlingly like some paintings of men
marching to war. Undoubtedly they were soldiers. Once or twice along
the line, the Earthmen saw huge projector-like instruments mounted on
wheels, being taken along with the marchers.

"Say, look at this scene!" called out Rokesmith.

He was standing before an open gate, staring in at the courtyard of a
large, pretentious stone building. Before the gate stood two guards
who evidently had been frozen just as they were turning about to stare
in through the entrance. On their faces was a look of aroused inquiry.
Inside the courtyard was a dramatic tableau.

       *       *       *       *       *

A young woman of great beauty was fixed in the posture of running. Her
foot was lifted from the ground, her body thrust forward, her face
strained, hair flowing backwards as if the wind were brushing it back.
In one hand, tightly grasped, was a scroll.

Directly behind her stood a young man with a look of astonishment
and anger on a face that was cruel and evil. His hand was still held
outstretched as if to grasp after the scroll that the woman was fleeing
with. All about, in similar positions of astonishment and anxiety, were
other men, some of whom had started forward as if about to commence a
pursuit.

"Some scene, eh?" murmured Barth. "Looks real dramatic. I wish we could
know what it was all about."

"That's an idea!" burst from Wanderman. "Why didn't I think of it
sooner? Barth! We can use the mentascope on these frozen people--with
the attachments that are used to read the minds of the newly dead,
can't we?"

"I think we can, Captain. These people are perfectly preserved; there's
no reason why we can't shoot a current through their brains and get the
information stored there."

They turned, commenced to retrace their steps to the ship. It took them
about ten minutes to reach the street by which they had entered the
city and come to the vessel. Once inside, they hastened to unpack the
mentascope and its attendant apparatus. When at last they were ready,
they left the airlock and started back; the return to the ship had
taken them about twenty minutes.

They entered the street of the city they had first chanced upon. As
they passed the first figure, Weber suddenly whirled around and stared
at it.

"Look! Stop and look at this man!"

The others gathered around.

"Does he look the same to you? It seems to me that it was his other leg
which was being put forward when last we saw him. I'm sure his arms
were in a different position."

They stared amazedly. The figure certainly was not in the identical
posture as before. Weber's observations had been correct.

"All the rest of them seem to be planted in slightly different
postures, too."

Captain Wanderman bent down, studied the arm of the man carefully. He
remained silent for some time, then he stood up. There was a tone of
awe and bewilderment in his voice when he spoke.

"It has moved, and what is more, it is still moving. I saw that hand
pass a given point on the body of the person in a few minutes. It's
like watching the hands of a clock. At first, they do not seem to move
at all, but if you watch closely enough for a time, you can observe the
motion."

"Do you mean this fellow is still alive?"

"It would seem so."

"But why the slow motion?" asked Opp.

"I think," said the captain slowly, "that the mentascope can help us
answer the whole business."

They came to the courtyard of the running woman. The tableau had
changed; it seemed as if a few seconds had passed since they left. Now
the figure of the woman was closer to the gate; the two guards from
outside had passed through and were going forward to seize her, while
the men behind were in full running appearance, as if, having recovered
from a surprise move, they were taking to pursuit.

"All right men: set down the apparatus."

Two men set down a small battery, attached it to wires leading from a
large metal helmet which another was placing over the head of the still
woman-figure. Other wires were attached to the space-suit helmet worn
by Captain Wanderman. Through the glassite panes it could be seen that
he was wearing a somewhat similar helmet himself, having donned this
while back on the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

A current of electrical energy was passed from an electrode pressed
against one particular part of the woman's head through to another
leading out. In passing through the brain of the woman, this current
picked up the last and deepest occurrences in the life of the person
subjected to it. It activated the cells on which these events were
recorded in a form much like that of a charged body. Passing out of the
brain, it carried these impressions with it and brought them to the
mind of the operator as distinct thoughts. Since basic thoughts are not
expressed in any language save impressions and pictures, the operator
finds that he has suddenly acquired the knowledge of the other.

Thus, in a brief time, Wanderman told the men of the story concerning
Nimbor and Toom, of the _mataiya's_ part in the drama. The men stood
in wonder, staring at the figures; Opp calmly walked over to Aald and
tweaked his nose. The Nimborian's expression did not change.

"I still can't grasp why these people are all like frozen statues,"
exclaimed Barth. "How can they live and act like everyday terrestrials
when this planet is so lacking in heat and light?"

"I think I can explain," said Wanderman. "It sounds fantastic, but it
is not impossible. And it would account for all the factors. I'll tell
you when we get back to the ship: right now we have work to do."

"What work?"

"We can't stand around and do nothing while this woman is captured. And
I, for one, do not care to see these sneering degenerates win this war.

"So I think we'll take over events on this planet for a while and fix
things to suit ourselves. We can easily move these figures if we adjust
our gravity belt to take care of the extra weight. Every man grab one
person; I'll take Oomith. Rokesmith, you take Aald; Weber, grab the
emperor, and you others pick out those who look important, who appear
like staff officers. And don't forget the mentascope."

In a moment each man was burdened with a native of Planet P swinging
over his shoulder. Thus burdened they marched through the center
of Nimbor, through the columns of the motionless army, back to the
spaceship. Several times they would have to halt and rest because of
the irrepressible laughter that broke out, among them. Imagine earthly
problems being solved like this!

In the ship, they dumped the Nimborians in a spare storehouse, while
the _mataiya_ was propped up on a seat in one of the cabins. The ship's
course was set for the general direction of Toom.

       *       *       *       *       *

"You men understand what is meant by time?" began Wanderman as the crew
gathered around. "It is the flow of events. It is the way we conceive
things happening. We place an arbitrary measurement of time by using
the period it takes our planet to rotate once on its axis. That is
a day. Dividing the day into sections, we get hours, minutes, and
seconds. To us, a second is a very short space of time.

"We move and live at a certain rate of speed: our heart pumps about 72
beats per minute. Our senses perceive a thing in a certain space of
time. Small as it may appear, it actually requires time for your eye to
see an object or for your hearing to function. Also for an impression
of feeling to travel from the skin to the brain and to be recognized.

"To these people of Planet P, their world appears as one delightful
to live in. For them a bright warm sun shines in a blue sky. For them
life moves at as quick a pace as it does for us on Earth. Their day
is approximately 24 hours also. To us, it may appear to be as long as
656 Earth days, since their world requires 656 Earth days to complete
one of its days, and I am figuring in proportion. To them, a day is no
longer than to us. Ten and four-fifths hours to us is only one of their
minutes.

"That is why they live so slowly; they are living at a different
time-rate than ours. Time moves for them exactly 656 times more slowly
than it does for us.

"They could not possibly live at our pace. For, to us, Planet P is
terribly cold; the sun is but little more than a bright star. But when
they see the sun, it takes 656 times longer before they observe it.
Thus, they actually get a time exposure. You know that if you want to
take a picture at night you must leave the lens open for a long time;
the longer it is open, the brighter the picture appears. Thus with
them: they see the sun as a brilliant ball; they see objects as highly
illuminated because their eyes are absorbing so much more light than
are ours.

"Thus their bodies are not cold and frozen: of a makeup to conform with
the time-rate on this planet, their bodies absorb and hold the heat
radiated by the sun until it appears to be hot. If you examine any of
these bodies now without your gloves, you will notice that they are as
warm as ours.

"These people seem to be motionless, or at least moving extremely
slowly. To them, they are moving at a normal pace. Here is where the
size of this planet comes in: under the huge gravity of this world,
they could not move fast. Their bodies must normally weigh a terrific
amount. That was another factor working in their evolution toward the
strange rate of time-flow."

Wanderman left the room. He went back to where he had placed Oomith
seated upright in a cabin. Seating himself directly before her eyes,
he stared into them. He fixed himself motionless as possible, remained
unmoving until the ship was ready to come to a halt at its destination.
Before he left, he had the satisfaction of noticing the _mataiya's_
pupils had finally focused on his; he felt certain that some impression
would be carried back with her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Landing at Toom, they placed Oomith where she was later to regain
control of her senses. They carried Aald and the others down to the
dungeons, imprisoning them there. Then they returned to the ship.

One more task remained: the war machines of Nimbor. Cruising over the
enemy lines, they dropped cables whenever they saw a projector and
attached them. Then they swung them up into the air, letting them
hang below until all had been thus captured. Once more they returned
to Toom, this time to place the projectors where they would be found
quickly.

The nature of the "burning death" of Nimbor they found to be simple.
It was nothing more or less than electric heaters, such as are sold in
winter on Earth. A polished reflector sent a beam of heat from the wire
coil in the center. To a terrestial, of course, this was nothing more
than a pleasantly warm current; but to a native of Planet P, with their
slower perceptions and great absorption of tiny amounts of heat, it was
a ray of pure destruction.

Thus, for a brief instant in the history of the cosmos, two similar
races and life forms met, the one greatly altering the course of
development the other would take. Although a few well-guarded
expeditions to Planet P have been made since, the Terrestial Council
is slow to permit these, inasmuch as the gross difference in
time-rate cannot permit fair intercourse with its people. It is felt
in scientific circles that for them to learn of the existence of a
race such as ours would be a crushing psychological blow to them; to
interfere, however well-meaningly, in their development would condemn
them to superstition, for they could arrive at no logical, scientific
explanation of such interference.

Planet P is not needed for the comfort or well-being of Earth. The
Patrol is there watching, ready to step in in cases of natural cosmic
emergency, but at other times gives the world a wide berth.

And Captain Wanderman will always remember the tableau in the
courtyard, and a beautiful woman running.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Planet That Time Forgot, by Donald A. Wollheim

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PLANET THAT TIME FORGOT ***

***** This file should be named 61797.txt or 61797.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/1/7/9/61797/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.